Create reference-yaml-mltable.md (#98593)
Azure/azure-content: articles/machine-learning/reference-yaml-mltable.md

---
title: 'CLI (v2) mltable YAML schema'
titleSuffix: Azure Machine Learning
description: Reference documentation for the CLI (v2) mltable YAML schema.
services: machine-learning
ms.service: machine-learning
ms.subservice: mldata
ms.topic: reference
ms.custom: cliv2, event-tier1-build-2022

author: xunwan
ms.author: xunwan
ms.date: 09/15/2022

> ms.reviewer: franksolomon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ms.reviewer: s-polly
```

---

> # CLI (v2) data YAML schema

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be "CLI (v2) MLTable YAML schema" ?

Author: Updated.

| `transformations`| array | Defined sequence of transformations that are applied to data loaded from defined paths. |`read_delimited`, `read_parquet` , `read_json_lines` , `take` to take the first N rows from dataset, `take_random_sample` to take a random sample of records in the dataset approximately by the probability specified, `skip` to skip the first N records from top of the dataset, `drop_columns`, `keep_columns`,... || 

## Examples

Examples are available in the [examples GitHub repository](https://github.com/Azure/azureml-examples/tree/main/sdk/assets/data). Several are shown below.

## MLTABLE paths: pattern

```yaml
type: mltable
paths:
  - file: https://dprepdata.blob.core.windows.net/demo/Titanic2.csv
transformations:
  - take: 1
```

## MLTABLE paths: file

```yaml
type: mltable
paths:
  - pattern: ./*.txt
transformations:
  - read_delimited:
      delimiter: ,
      encoding: ascii

>       header: all_files_same_headers

Reviewer 2: Think customer might want to know what's the other options for "header"?

Author: Updated.

```

## MLTABLE transformations: read_delimited

```yaml
paths:
  - file: https://dprepdata.blob.core.windows.net/demo/Titanic2.csv
transformations:
  - read_delimited:
      infer_column_types: false
      delimiter: ','
      encoding: 'ascii'
      empty_as_string: false
  - take: 10
```

## MLTABLE transformations: read_json_lines
```yaml
paths:
  - file: ./order_invalid.jsonl
transformations:
  - read_json_lines:
        encoding: utf8
        invalid_lines: drop
        include_path_column: false
```

> ## MLTABLE transformations: read_json_lines, convert_column_types

Reviewer 2: Do we want to split this section into two, one for each tranformation?

Convert_column_types is a complex transformation. We might add more details such as what types are supported, is null allowed for each type, etc.

```yaml
paths:
  - file: ./train_annotations.jsonl
transformations:
  - read_json_lines:
        encoding: utf8

>         invalid_lines: error

Reviewer 2: Do we want to document what's other valid options for invalid_lines parameter, and behavior of each option?

Author: Updated.

        include_path_column: false
  - convert_column_types:
      - columns: image_url

>         column_type: stream_info

Reviewer 3: I think we can add more examples for convert_column_type. Let me know if you want some examples from me.

Author: Hi @sachinparyani, could you please help to add more for convert_column_type? Thanks!

Reviewer 4: I agree. It's not super clear to me what `convert_column_type` does or how to use it from the existing doc.

---
title: 'CLI (v2) mltable YAML schema'
titleSuffix: Azure Machine Learning
description: Reference documentation for the CLI (v2) MLTable YAML schema.
services: machine-learning
ms.service: machine-learning
ms.subservice: mltable
ms.topic: reference
ms.custom: cliv2, event-tier1-build-2022

author: xunwan
ms.author: xunwan
ms.date: 09/15/2022
ms.reviewer: s-polly
---

# CLI (v2) data YAML schema

[!INCLUDE [cli v2](../../includes/machine-learning-cli-v2.md)]

The source JSON schema can be found at https://azuremlschemas.azureedge.net/latest/MLTable.schema.json.

[!INCLUDE [schema note](../../includes/machine-learning-preview-old-json-schema-note.md)]

> 

Reviewer 5: Should we have a section at the beginning "When to use MLTable" e.g. "in cases of complex schema, automl. If cases don't suit or you want to write your own parsing logic in python then please use uris?"

| `transformations`| array | Defined sequence of transformations that are applied to data loaded from defined paths. |`read_delimited`, `read_parquet` , `read_json_lines` , `take` to take the first N rows from dataset, `take_random_sample` to take a random sample of records in the dataset approximately by the probability specified, `skip` to skip the first N records from top of the dataset, `drop_columns`, `keep_columns`,... || 

## Examples

Examples are available in the [examples GitHub repository](https://github.com/Azure/azureml-examples/tree/main/sdk/assets/data). Several are shown below.

## MLTable paths: file
```yaml
type: mltable
paths:
  - file: https://dprepdata.blob.core.windows.net/demo/Titanic2.csv
transformations:
  - take: 1
```

## MLTable paths: pattern
```yaml
type: mltable
paths:

>   - pattern: ./*.txt

Reviewer 4: Might be worth mentioning what glob patterns are supported. If they are using some existing standard, maybe link to that.

transformations:
  - read_delimited:
      delimiter: ,
      encoding: ascii
      header: all_files_same_headers
```

## MLTable transformations
These are transforms that all mltable-artifact files support:

- `take`: Takes the first *n* records of the table
- `take_random_sample`: Takes a random sample of the table where each record has a *probability* of being selected. The user can also include a *seed*.
- `skip`: This skips the first *n* records of the table
- `drop_columns`: Drops the specified columns from the table. This transform supports regex so that users can drop columns matching a particular pattern.
- `keep_columns`: Keeps only the specified columns in the table. This transform supports regex so that users can keep columns matching a particular pattern.

## MLTable transformations: read_delimited

```yaml
paths:
  - file: https://dprepdata.blob.core.windows.net/demo/Titanic2.csv
transformations:
  - read_delimited:
      infer_column_types: false
      delimiter: ','
      encoding: 'ascii'
      empty_as_string: false
  - take: 10
```

## Delimited files transformations
Following transformations are specific to delimited files.

> - infer_column_types: Boolean to infer column data types. Defaults to `True`. Type inference requires that the data source is accessible from current compute. Currently type inference will only pull first 200 rows. If the data contains multiple types of value, it is better to provide desired type as an override via set_column_types argument

Reviewer 4: Comment mentions `set_column_types` to manually specify schema, but I don't see how to use `set_column_types` documented anywhere. Am I missing something?

- support_multi_line: By default (support_multi_line=`False`), all line breaks, including those in quoted field values, will be interpreted as a record break. Reading data this way is faster and more optimized for parallel execution on multiple CPU cores. However, it may result in silently producing more records with misaligned field values. This should be set to `True` when the delimited files are known to contain quoted line breaks.

## MLTable transformations: read_json_lines
```yaml
paths:
  - file: ./order_invalid.jsonl
transformations:
  - read_json_lines:
        encoding: utf8
        invalid_lines: drop
        include_path_column: false
```

## MLTable transformations: read_json_lines, convert_column_types
```yaml
paths:
  - file: ./train_annotations.jsonl
transformations:
  - read_json_lines:
        encoding: utf8
        invalid_lines: error
        include_path_column: false
  - convert_column_types:
      - columns: image_url
        column_type: stream_info
```

### Json lines transformations

> Below are the supported transformations that are specific for json lines:

Reviewer 4: Does this support only flat json, or is there some way to expand simple nested json as well? If only flat, might be helpful to call that out explicitly.

Author: Only flat. Updated.

- `include_path` Boolean to keep path information as column in the MLTable. Defaults to False. This is useful when reading multiple files, and want to know which file a particular record originated from, or to keep useful information in file path.
- `invalid_lines` How to handle lines that are invalid JSON. Supported values are `error` and `drop`. Defaults to `error`.
- `encoding` Specify the file encoding. Supported encodings are `utf8`, `iso88591`, `latin1`, `ascii`, `utf16`, `utf32`, `utf8bom` and `windows1252`. Default is `utf8`.

## MLTable transformations: read_parquet
```yaml
type: mltable

> traits:

Reviewer 4: Is index column the only trait right now? is this related to partition?

Author: index_columns: Set the table index using existing columns. This trait can be used by partition_by in the data plane to split data by the index.
timestamp_column: Defines the timestamp column of the table. This trait can be used in filter transforms, or in other data plane operations (SDK) such as drift detection.

Author: It's not decided yet if we should hold the release of Traits for more customer feedback. I might remove Traits from the example here.

  index_columns: ID
paths:
  - file: ./crime.parquet
transformations:
  - read_parquet
```
### Parquet files transformations
If user doesn't define options for `read_parquet` transformation, default options will be selected (see below).

- `include_path_column`: Boolean to keep path information as column in the table. Defaults to False. This is useful when reading multiple files, and want to know which file a particular record originated from, or to keep useful information in file path.

> 

Reviewer 5: Should we include read_delta_lake?

---
title: 'CLI (v2) mltable YAML schema'
titleSuffix: Azure Machine Learning
description: Reference documentation for the CLI (v2) MLTable YAML schema.
services: machine-learning
ms.service: machine-learning
ms.subservice: mldata
ms.topic: reference
ms.custom: cliv2, event-tier1-build-2022

author: xunwan
ms.author: xunwan
ms.date: 09/15/2022
ms.reviewer: s-polly
---

# CLI (v2) mltable YAML schema

[!INCLUDE [cli v2](../../includes/machine-learning-cli-v2.md)]

The source JSON schema can be found at https://azuremlschemas.azureedge.net/latest/MLTable.schema.json.

> [!Note]

> > `MLTable` helps you to abstract the schema definition for tabular data so it is more suitable for complex schema or to be leveraged in automl. If you just want to create an data asset for a job or you want to write your own parsing logic in python you could just use `uri_file`, `uri_folder` as mentioned in [CLI (v2) data YAML schema](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/machine-learning/reference-yaml-data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> `MLTable` helps you to abstract the schema definition for tabular data so it is more suitable for complex schema or to be leveraged in automl. If you just want to create an data asset for a job or you want to write your own parsing logic in python you could just use `uri_file`, `uri_folder` as mentioned in [CLI (v2) data YAML schema](reference-yaml-data.md).
```
